Now let's turn our attention to compile statement.
The first two statement types are pretty easy
to handle.
Unconditional statements are usually assignment
expressions or procedure calls.
We'll simply ask compile_expr to generate
the appropriate code.
Compound statements are equally easy.
We'll recursively call compile_statement to
generate code for each statement in turn.
The code for statement_2 will immediately
follow the code generated for statement_1.
Execution will proceed sequentially through
the code for each statement.
Here we see the simplest form the conditional
statement, where we need to generate code
to evaluate the test expression and then,
if the value in the register is FALSE, skip
over the code that executes the statement
in the THEN clause.
The simple assembly-language template uses
recursive calls to compile_expr and compile_statement
to generate code for the various parts of
the IF statement.
The full-blown conditional statement includes
an ELSE clause, which should be executed if
the value of the test expression is FALSE.
The template uses some branches and labels
to ensure the course of execution is as intended.
You can see that the compilation process is
really just the application of many small
templates that break the code generation task
down step-by-step into smaller and smaller
tasks, generating the necessary code to glue
all the pieces together in the appropriate
fashion.
And here's the template for the WHILE statement,
which looks a lot like the template for the
IF statement with a branch at the end that
causes the generated code to be re-executed
until the value of the test expression is
FALSE.
With a bit of thought, we can improve on this
template slightly.
We've reorganized the code so that only a
single branch instruction (BT) is executed
each iteration, instead of the two branches
(BF, BR) per iteration in the original template.
Not a big deal, but little optimizations to
code inside a loop can add up to big savings
in a long-running program.
Just a quick comment about another common
iteration statement, the FOR loop.
The FOR loop is a shorthand way of expressing
iterations where the loop index ("i" in the
example shown) is run through a sequence of
values and the body of the FOR loop is executed
once for each value of the loop index.
The FOR loop can be transformed into the WHILE
statement shown here, which can then be compiled
using the templates shown above.
In this example, we've applied our templates
to generate code for the iterative implementation
of the factorial function that we've seen
before.
Look through the generated code and you'll
be able to match the code fragments with the
templates from last couple of slides.
It's not the most efficient code, but not
bad given the simplicity of the recursive-descent
approach for compiling high-level programs.
It's a simple matter to modify the recursive-descent
process to accommodate variable values that
are stored in dedicated registers rather than
in main memory.
Optimizing compilers are quite good at identifying
opportunities to keep values in registers
and hence avoid the LD and ST operations needed
to access values in main memory.
Using this simple optimization, the number
of instructions in the loop has gone from
10 down to 4.
Now the generated code is looking pretty good!
But rather than keep tweaking the recursive-descent
approach, let's stop here.
In the next segment, we'll see how modern
compilers take a more general approach to
generating code.
Still though, the first time I learned about
recursive descent, I ran home to write a simple
implementation and marveled at having authored
my own compiler in an afternoon!